A Meta-Analysis of the Role of Environment-Based Voluntariness in IT Acceptance

INTRODUCTION
For the last two decades, a key objective of much IS research has been to investigate the factors that motivate individuals to use information systems. Pursuing this objective, Davis and his colleagues (1989) have developed the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM). The model asserts that the intention to use or actual use of an information system is a function of perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness. In addition, the model also proposes that perceived ease of use influences perceived usefulness. From its inception, TAM has been widely applied to a diverse set of information technologies and users, and has received substantial empirical support (e.g., Adams et al. 1992; Agarwal and Karahanna 2000; Gefen et al. 2003a). 
Meanwhile, prior research has investigated the importance of a social influence factor and contextual variable, namely, voluntariness. The research has done so via two perspectives: first, its moderating role between behavioral intention and such other variables as subjective norms (Hartwick and Barki 1994; Venkatesh et al. 2003), and second, its direct effect on IT adoption and use (Agarwal and Prasad 1997; Karahanna et al. 1999). However, research has yet to examine the role of voluntariness in the relationships among the four primary TAM constructs of perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness, behavioral intention, and usage. As Brown and her colleagues (2002) point out, examining the role of voluntariness in TAM can help researchers ascertain whether the well-documented TAM relationships differ in voluntary versus nonvoluntary environments. They thus suggest the need to include voluntariness in the model to capture the possible variation of the model¡¯s performance. 
This study responds to this research need by conducting a meta-analysis of previous TAM studies and investigating the role of environment-based voluntariness in moderating the relationships among the four constructs. A meta-analysis is quite appropriate for such investigation because the empirical studies included in the data set offer a variety of system-use environments and thus various levels of environment-based voluntariness. Such environments and levels are unlikely to be obtained from a single study. Moreover, a synthesis of previous studies can assist in evaluating TAM findings, robustness, and limitations. Such evaluation can help IS researchers resolve some of the controversy surrounding the methodology of TAM research, identify possible research opportunities, and conduct future studies (Lee et al. 2003). Finally, such a study also responds to Straub and Burton-Jones¡¯s (2007) call for meta-analysis examining the main TAM relationships and important moderating factors. As they point out, such a meta-analysis will help researchers achieve the goal of moving TAM research toward parsimony.
Therefore, the objective of this paper is to address the following research questions: (1) Does environment-based voluntariness impact TAM findings about perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness, behavioral intention, and usage? (2) If so, does it impact them differently? To answer these questions, this paper develops a theoretical model that integrates environment-based voluntariness into TAM and tests the model through a combination of meta-analysis and weighted least squares regression procedures. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
TAM and Other Important Factors
While acknowledging the robustness and power of TAM, researchers continue to attempt to extend the model with other factors critical to IT adoption and use. In a meta-analysis of TAM, Lee and his colleagues (2003) find that more than 20 other factors have been introduced into the model. Among them, the most frequently introduced factors can be categorized into two main groups. 
The first includes individual difference factors such as level of education (Agarwal and Prasad 1999; Bostrom et al. 1990), gender (Gefen and Straub 1997; Venkatesh and Morris 2000), computer self-efficacy (Compeau et al. 1999; Fu et al. 2006; Hong et al. 2001), and prior experience (Agarwal and Prasad 1999; Igbaria et al. 1995). The second group includes social influence factors such as voluntariness (Harwick and Barki 1994; Karahanna et al. 1999), subjective norms (Mathieson 1991; Wu and Liu 2007), image (Plouffe et al. 2001; Venkatesh and Davis 2000), and management support (Igbaria et al. 1997). Both individual difference and social influence factors are critical to our understanding of user acceptance of IT because both play significant roles in influencing how users make their decisions about system adoption and use (Venkatesh and Morris 2000). Moreover, prior studies indicate that some of these factors can be important moderators of key relationships in technology acceptance models (Brown et al. 2002; Hartwick and Barki 1994; Morris and Venkatesh 2000; Srite and Karahanna 2006; Sun and Zhang 2006; Venkatesh and Davis 2000; Venkatesh and Morris 2000; Venkatesh et al. 2003). Next, we will discuss voluntariness, the core social influence factor of this paper, in the context of technology acceptance.
Voluntariness and IT Adoption
Voluntariness is defined as the degree of free will involved in the adoption of an information system. An individual¡¯s freedom to choose to adopt an information system is primarily affected by contextual factors. An organizational policy may require the use of a particular information system, and thus deprive the individual of the freedom of choice (Moore and Benbasat 1991). An individual¡¯s job description can also include such requirement. For example, accountants¡¯ job descriptions may require them to use an accounting information system to record the flow of corporate funds. A mandate from superiors can also influence technology use in an organization (Agarwal and Prasad 1997). Specifically, superiors who are aware of the advantages of a particular information system may thus expect or even require their subordinates to use it (Sasidharan et al. 2006). Notwithstanding organizational policy, job description, and superiors¡¯ mandates, employees within an organization may still lack freedom to choose to adopt if they are required to use the system to perform their jobs (Brown et al. 2002). 
Previous IS research suggests that voluntariness can be based in the environment or in the user. Voluntariness based in the environment refers to a context-dependent freedom in adopting an information system. This voluntariness is non-perceptually based, stems from a physical context, and is independent of personal biases and points of view. Motivation of system use is thus extrinsic. For each context, a corresponding voluntariness degree can be measured by analyzing the environment-related information, such as the extent one¡¯s superior requires the use. Studies of environment-based voluntariness focus on how environments differentially influence user adoption behavior (Brown et al. 2002; Venkatesh et al. 2003). 
Voluntariness based in the user refers to a perception-dependent freedom in adopting an information system (Moore and Benbasat 1991). Such voluntariness is subjective because it exists inside users¡¯ minds; thus, motivation is intrinsic. Individuals who share the same environment can nevertheless differ in their willingness to use an information system. That is, they can have different degrees of user-based voluntariness. Studies of user-based voluntariness focus on how IS adoption behavior is different when users perceive an adoption decision as more or less voluntary (Karahanna et al. 1999; Agarwal and Prasad 1997). We think it is important to distinguish between environment- and user-based voluntariness because such a distinction helps IS researchers better understand the concept of voluntariness, more effectively design and conduct relevant research, and more accurately interpret their findings. 
Previous research suggests that voluntariness can be studied as either a continuous or a binary variable. Moore and Benbasat (1991) argue that system-use behavior can be neither completely voluntary nor mandatory, but lies somewhere between the two. Thus, they measure voluntariness on a continuum. Similarly, Karahanna and her colleagues (1999) argue that voluntariness can be widely variable, even when the system is held constant. However, simply viewing system use as either voluntary or mandatory, Hartwick and Barki (1994) and Venkatesh and his colleagues (2003) treat voluntariness as a binary construct.
Moore and Benbasat (1991) are among the first researchers to pay attention to the construct of voluntariness. In their study developing an instrument to measure IT adoption perceptions, they argue that when examining the diffusion of IT, research attention must be given to whether individuals are free to make and apply personal adoption or rejection decisions. They also argue, based on their common sense and experience, that there tend to be degrees of voluntariness with respect to behavior in organizations. Finally, to help researchers clarify assumptions about the freedom of choice in IT adoption, they develop a 4-item scale to measure voluntariness. 
Subsequent research on voluntariness can be categorized into two main streams. The first stream seeks to understand the moderating role of environment-based voluntariness in the context of information system use. In a study examining the relationship between user participation and system use, Hartwick and Barki (1994) divide research participants into a mandatory-user group and a voluntary-user group based on their system-use environments. The results of their study indicate that environment-based voluntariness moderates the roles of user participation and involvement in system use behavior. More specifically, they find that for the voluntary group, user participation and involvement are important predictors of attitudes, norms, intentions, and use, while for the mandatory group, user participation does not predict any of these variables, and user involvement also fails to predict attitude and subjective norm. Thus, they argue that depending on whether system-use environment is voluntary, the roles of user participation and involvement can be different. 
Similarly, in a research paper focusing on a unified model of IT adoption, Venkatesh and his colleagues (2003) investigate the moderating role of environment-based voluntariness. They use the scale developed by Moore and Benbasat (1991) to measure voluntariness level, and divide their four empirical studies into two groups: a voluntary-use group and a mandatory-use group. They find that social influence (measured via three constructs ¨C subjective norm, social factors, and image) has a stronger effect on behavioral intention in the context of mandatory use than in the context of voluntary use. Similar results have also been reported by Venkatesh and Davis (2000). 
The second stream seeks to examine the direct impact of user-based voluntariness on IT adoption and use. In a study examining the impact of technology characteristics on the acceptance of that technology, Agarwal and Prasad (1997) find a differential influence of user-based voluntariness on current and future system-use intentions. Specifically, voluntariness has a significant effect on current system use, but not on continued-usage intention. Meanwhile, in a study focusing on the differences in pre- and post-adoption beliefs and attitudes, Karahanna and her colleagues (1999) also examine the relationship between user-based voluntariness and behavioral intention. The results of their study indicate that user-based voluntariness is a significant determinant of intention for current users, but not for potential adopters.
In summary, prior studies on voluntariness have made three primary assumptions: (1) voluntariness can be based in the environment and in the user; (2) voluntariness can be measured as a continuous or a binary variable; (3) varying levels of voluntariness exist regarding system use in organizations and institutions. Moreover, previous work collectively confirms the important role of voluntariness in shaping an individual¡¯s intention to use or actual use of an information system.
RESEARCH MODEL AND HYPOTHESES
Evidence from Prior Research
A voluntary or willful action differs from a nonvoluntary action in that the voluntary action is internally determined by the individual, whereas the nonvoluntary action is directed or coerced from outside. A nonvoluntary action is thus reactive while a voluntary action is active (Polivanova 2001). In the context of information system use, Doll and Torkzadeh (1998) argue that when usage is nonvoluntary, the actual use of a system may only mean conformance to a superior¡¯s requirements or compliance with organizational policies. On the other hand, when usage is voluntary, intention to use and actual usage reflect the individual¡¯s perceptions and beliefs regarding the system (Hartwick and Barki 1994).
Although various types of systems are employed for different purposes, user perceptions and beliefs regarding those systems may have the same focus. For example, when a project team member has the free will to use or not use a groupware system (e.g., Lotus Domino Discussion Database), the individual will probably consider whether the system is easy to use and whether the technology is useful to add additional value to project outcome (Lerouge et al. 2004). Similarly, when individuals make their own decisions to adopt or reject an electronic tax-filing system, they may consider whether the system is easy to learn and use, and whether the system is useful to their tax return preparation (Wang 2002). Following this line of thought, we argue that in a voluntary-use environment, perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness are more likely to be the fundamental determinants of intention to use or to actually use an information system.
Prior research suggests some evidence in favor of the above argument by emphasizing that in a voluntary-use environment, factors other than perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness are less likely to significantly impact behavioral intention. For example, Venkatesh and his colleagues (2003) provide empirical evidence that social influence constructs (i.e., subjective norm, social factors, and image) play a relatively insignificant role in predicting behavioral intention in voluntary-use environments. Similarly, Hartwick and Barki (1994) empirically show that subjective norm does not have a significant impact on intention in voluntary settings. The same result is replicated by Venkatesh and Davis (2000) in a study of an extended TAM model. In light of this, we argue that the attenuation or disappearance of the impact of these social influence constructs on intention and usage suggests the possibility that in a voluntary-use environment, some other factors (such as, perhaps, perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness) may play a key role in predicting behavioral intention and usage.
TRA and Related Studies
The theory of reasoned action (TRA) and related studies also support the proposition that perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness will more significantly impact behavioral intention and usage in voluntary-use environments. TRA focuses on examining the determinants of volitional behavior¡ªthe behavior under an individual¡¯s control (Karahanna et al. 1999). Previous research suggests that voluntary behavior is likely to be the result of the individual¡¯s favorable attitude, while mandatory behavior is likely to be the result of organizational coercion (Hartwick and Barki 1994). Moreover, TRA asserts that an individual's attitude toward a behavior is determined by a set of salient beliefs the individual holds about performing the behavior (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980). To date, the two most salient beliefs identified in the IT adoption and use literature are perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness (Davis 1989; Davis et al. 1989). Taken together, it can be reasoned that voluntary behavior of using an information system is more likely influenced by perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness. In other words, in voluntary-use environments, perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness are likely the two most important determinants of behavioral intention and usage. Therefore, it is plausible to posit that the more that voluntariness is embedded into system-use environments, the greater is the impact of perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness on behavioral intention and usage. 
The Theory of Apparent Mental Causation
The theory of apparent mental causation is proposed to account for the experience of free will (Wegner 2002; Wegner and Wheatley 1999). According to this theory, individuals usually experience ¡°conscious will¡± (i.e., the power of choosing their own actions) when they interpret their own thought as the cause of their action. Thus, the ¡°conscious will¡± can be viewed as a function of the priority, consistency, and exclusivity of the thought about the action; the thought should therefore occur before the action, be consistent with the action, and be unaccompanied by other causes (Wegner 2002). In essence, the theory indicates that individuals experience voluntariness mostly when their thought about an action is the primary cause of the action (Wegner and Erskine 2003). 
The relevance of the theory to the study of IT adoption is clear. When individuals voluntarily use an information system, their thoughts about using are very likely the main cause of behavioral intention and usage. According to prior research (Davis 1989; Davis et al. 1989), such thoughts may involve evaluating the ease of use and usefulness of the system. This is because ease of use and usefulness are greatly important to users, the former reducing their efforts and the latter helping them to perform their jobs better (Davis 1989). It is thus reasonable to theorize that in the voluntary-use environments, both perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness are the most likely factors contributing to individuals¡¯ intention to use an information system. Therefore, these two factors should be more correlated to behavioral intention and usage when voluntariness is present. 
Hypotheses and Model
Figure 1 shows the research model. Based on the aforementioned theories, findings, and arguments, we hypothesize that the effect of perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness on behavioral intention and usage is environmentally-dependent. That is, the influence of ease of use and usefulness on intention and usage increases as environment-based voluntariness increases. Thus, we present four hypotheses: 
	Environment-based voluntariness will moderate the correlation between 
	H1:	perceived usefulness and behavioral intention.
	H2:	perceived ease of use and behavioral intention.
	H3:	perceived usefulness and usage.
	H4:	perceived ease of use and usage.
	At the same time, we argue that environment-based voluntariness lacks an effect on a relationship when behavioral intention or usage is uninvolved. More specially, we argue that the effect of perceived ease of use on perceived usefulness is not influenced by environment-based voluntariness. According to Davis and his colleagues (1989), perceived ease of use contributes to perceived usefulness because increased ease of use contributes to improved performance. If an information system is easy to use, it is likely to save users effort and improve their performance, and thus they perceive it as useful, no matter whether their usage is based on their own decisions or on requirements. This is in accordance with the notion that both perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness are based on the nature of information systems, but not on the system-use environments (Davis 1989). Therefore, we propose that the effect of perceived ease of use on perceived usefulness is environmentally-independent: the influence of ease of use on usefulness in voluntary-use environments does not significantly differ from that in mandatory-use environments.  Formally,
H5:	Environment-based voluntariness will not moderate the correlation between perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness.
METHODOLOGY
	Meta-analysis is employed to test the research hypotheses. As a set of statistical techniques, meta-analysis refers to analysis that combines results from many individual studies addressing the same research question (Glass 1976; Hunter and Schmidt 1990). Previous research shows that meta-analysis is not only a useful tool for research synthesis (Hwang 1996; Lee et al. 2003; Ma and Liu 2004), but also an effective instrument for hypothesis testing (Dennis et al. 2001; Sabherwal et. al. 2006; Sharma and Yetton 2003). 
Sample
The sample of this meta-analysis includes studies from journals, books, dissertations, and conference proceedings. Dissertations and conference proceedings are included to minimize the potential bias of the higher effect sizes associated with journal articles; it is widely accepted that journals are more likely to publish studies with significant, hypothesis-supporting results (Dennis et al. 2001; Rosenthal 1979; Sharma and Yetton 2003). To locate studies, we searched bibliographic databases and both electronic and hardcopy bibliographies in journals, conference proceedings, and books (Rosenthal 1990). The bibliographic databases were ABI/INFORM, Business Source Premier, ScienceDirect, ProQuest Dissertation and Thesis, WorldCat Dissertation and Thesis, and various conference proceedings such as the International Conference on Information Systems and the Americas Conference on Information Systems. We did manual searches whenever back issues of the journals were unavailable in bibliographic databases. To find more studies, we also sent a general inquiry for working papers and conference proceedings to the IS community through the most popular mailing list in IS field, AISWorld. Via such a comprehensive search strategy, we were able to maximize the number of studies, reduce the source bias, and thus increase the power of the meta-analysis (Sharma and Yetton 2003).
We conducted the computer searches in bibliographic databases with such keywords as technology acceptance model, TAM, adoption, acceptance, behavioral intention, use, usage, ease of use, and usefulness. The searches found more than 650 journal articles, 400 conference proceedings, and 400 unpublished dissertations. Those articles, proceedings, and dissertations were then examined to locate studies that could provide data to be included in the meta-analysis. Moreover, bibliographies of the articles identified were also scanned to locate additional studies. We thus identified over 100 studies and checked their potential for inclusion.
Studies were chosen if they satisfied the following criteria: (1) they operationalized perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness, and behavioral intention/usage; (2) they reported reliabilities of measures of the variables; (3) they described an information system usage context in a way that gave enough information to code the measure of environment-based voluntariness; (4) they reported sample sizes; (5) they reported the correlations among perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness, and behavioral intention/usage, or they reported other values that could be converted to correlations. 
	An important assumption in meta-analysis is the independence of each study (Ma and Liu 2004). To satisfy this assumption, we ensured the uniqueness of each study by carefully comparing its description and statistical data with those of others. If two or more studies reported in different articles, proceedings, and dissertations were based on same data set, they were treated as one study, and only one was selected. On the other hand, when a study presented multiple data sets based on the same sample, the simple average values were recorded (Heneman 1986). Again, this was done to preserve the assumption. Conversely, when a study presented multiple data sets based on different samples, each data set was treated as a separate study. According to Hunter and his colleagues (1982), this approach was appropriate and did not violate the assumption. Finally, when a study presented one data set for behavioral intention and another data set for usage based on the same sample, the two data sets were treated as two separate studies for the purpose of this meta-analysis. 
	Appendix C1 (for behavioral intention studies) and C2 (for usage studies) present the studies included in the meta-analysis and the data collected from them. The final sample consists of 39 journal articles, 5 conference proceedings, and 10 dissertations. The 39 journal articles contributed 52 studies (36 for behavioral intention and 16 for usage) for the meta-analysis, because 1 journal article reported 3 separate studies and 11 journal articles each reported 2 separate studies. The 5 conference proceedings contributed 5 studies for behavioral intention. The 10 dissertations contributed 14 studies (9 for behavioral intention and 5 for usage) because 1 reported 4 separate studies and another reported 2 separate studies. Consequently, the meta-analysis is based on 71 studies; 50 of them measuring the relationships among ease of use, usefulness, and behavioral intention, and 21 of them measuring the relationships among ease of use, usefulness, and usage.
Measurement of Voluntariness
Environment-based voluntariness was evaluated for each study in the meta-analysis. Following Sharma and Yetton¡¯s (2003) approach, a description of the system-use environment was created by taking all portions of text from each study literally; no changes were allowed unless to link extracts coming from different parts of the original study.  The description included all information given in the original study concerning the introduction of the information system, where and why it was used, whether the use was required by superiors/professors or job/school responsibility, and the end users sampled. 
This study employed the 4-item scale of voluntariness developed and validated by Moore and Benbasat (1991). Table 1 presents the scale. Two independent judges and the senior author of the current study rated the description of each study on this scale. The results indicated high internal reliability: the three Cronbach¡¯s alpha values (one per rater), based on the 63 unique studies (in Table 2), were 0.95, 0.94, and 0.97. Moreover, inter-rater Pearson's correlations were 0.82, 0.81, and 0.82, and the average Shrout and Fleiss¡¯s (1979) intraclass correlation for the raters was 0.92. Overall, these results provide strong evidence of high inter-rater reliability. The average voluntariness scores for the studies are also shown in Appendix C1 and C2. 
